# single-cell-genomics-r
Comprehensive guidelines for conducting single-cell RNA-seq analysis using R

# These guidelines have been authored by Waqar Hanif.
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/waqarhanif/

These guidelines assume a foundational understanding of molecular biology and familiarity with single-cell RNA-sequencing technologies. 

# Requirements: 
- At least 32 GB RAM
- ~200 GB storage (at least for a basic project)
- Linux operating system
- R (preferrably R studio)

The provided code guidelines are specifically tailored for analyzing data generated by 10X Genomics, encompassing both V2 and V3 chemistries.

While the focus of these guidelines lies on analyzing a prostate cancer dataset obtained from 10X Genomics V2 chemistry, they can be applied to reproduce similar results for virtually any disease, as long as you possess V2 or V3 datasets generated by 10X Genomics.

# Guidelines Overview
The guidelines provide a comprehensive workflow for single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis using R. The main steps covered in these guidelines are as follows:

# Data Retrieval
Obtain scRNA-seq expression profiles from the NCBI GEO repository using the accession ID GSE153892. You can use ArrayExpression, EMBL-ENA or any other database for scRNA-seq datasets.

To download the data, use wget.
## For example: 
'wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR121/088/SRR12159588/SRR12159588_1.fastq.gz'

This is for just the forward reads, you have to download the reverse reads for each sample as well. It's better if you write a script that can take all the FTP links in a text document and download each using wget through BASH script that can automate the task for you. 

# Mapping of the Raw Reads
The files we downloaded previously are FASTQ files and mean nothing without mapping/aligning to the reference genome, in our case which is Homo sapiens reference genome. To obtain a reference genome of the species that you are working on, you can obtain it from NCBI Genomes, ENSEMBL FTP or UCSC Genome Browser. I typically download it from ENSEMBL FTP. 

- Base link: https://www.ensembl.org/info/data/ftp/index.html?redirect=no
- For Humans: https://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-109/fasta/homo_sapiens/dna/

### Note: make sure that you download the file with "primary assembly" in the file name. 

Alignment plays a crucial role in identifying the origin of reads or fragments by determining where they align best on the reference genome. This process helps us quantify the number of reads that align to specific positions, which enables the creation of a gene x cell count matrix.

Utilize the STAR splice-aware aligner and its submodule solo to map the raw FASTQ files. Adjust various parameters during the mapping process.



# Count Matrix Generation
Identify valid barcodes as cells and count Unique Molecular Identifiers (UMIs) mapped to each cell.
Generate a sparse matrix format count matrix (cell x gene) to represent gene expression.

# Quality Control
Perform quality control measures to ensure data integrity.
Remove mitochondrial reads, filter out dead cells and low-quality reads based on specific metrics.

# Finding Highly Variable Features
Select the top genes that exhibit substantial variation in expression as highly variable features.

# Dimension Reduction and Cell Clustering
Calculate principal components (PCs) for dimensionality reduction.
Apply cell clustering techniques to group similar cells together.

# Cell Annotation
Employ the scType R package for automated cell annotation and labeling based on marker genes.

# Differential Expression Analysis
Investigate gene expression differences between different cell types.

# Identifying Marker Genes
Determine marker genes associated with specific cell types based on their significant discriminatory expression patterns.

# Functional Enrichment Analysis
Perform enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology terms and KEGG pathways to gain insights into biological processes and molecular functions.

# Cell-Cell Communication Analysis
Utilize the CellChat R package to examine intercellular communication networks and signaling interactions within the cellular network.
Focus on analyzing communication within immune cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME).

These guidelines aim to provide a step-by-step approach to single-cell RNA-seq analysis, enabling researchers to gain insights into gene expression patterns, cell types, and intercellular communication in complex biological systems.

# Step 1: Data Retrieval 
First and foremest, you have to download/obtain the FASTQ (you may have BCL files, in that case you need to convert them to FASTQ).

# Step 2: Mapping and Count Matrix Generation

# Step 3: Quality Control and Removal 